**B:** Translations of “Free Software” and “Gratis Software” {#b-translations-of-freesoftware-and-gratissoftware .unnumbered}
============================================================

对“自由软件”和“免费软件”的翻译
=============

@firstcopyingnotice{{ The most current list of translations and
transliterations is maintained at
<http://gnu.org/philosophy/fs-translations.html>. Please send any
additional translations or corrections to the list to
<web-translators@gnu.org>. @medskip @footnoterule @smallskip Copyright ©
1999, 2000, 2004, 2006–2015 Free Software Foundation, Inc.\
 {This version of the list is part of @fsfsthreecite}

This is a list of recommended unambiguous translations for the term
“free software” (“free as in freedom”) into various languages, along
with translations for the term “gratis software,” in a separate column,
to show how to make the contrast. The parenthesized phrases in Latin
letters after some of the entries are transliterations (with vowels
added where relevant).

@raggedright

@global@hbadness=10000 @global@hfuzz=3.4pt

en

English

free software

gratis software

af

Afrikaans

vrye sagteware

gratis sagteware

ar

Arabic

@lowerbox{2.7pt,
![fs-translations/ar-libre](fs-translations/ar-libre.png)}\
 *(barmajiyat ḥorrah)*

be

Belarusian

@lowerbox{2pt,
![fs-translations/be-libre](fs-translations/be-libre.png)} *(svabodnae
pragramnae zabes’pjachen’ne)*

bg

Bulgarian

@lowerbox{2pt,
![fs-translations/bg-libre](fs-translations/bg-libre.png)}\
 *(svoboden softuer)*

@lowerbox{2pt,
![fs-translations/bg-gratis](fs-translations/bg-gratis.png)} *(bezplaten
softuer)*

bn

Bengali

@lowerbox{3pt,
![fs-translations/bn-libre](fs-translations/bn-libre.png)}\
 *(swadhin software)*

ca

Catalan

programari lliure

programari gratuït

cs

Czech

svobodný software

bezplatný software

cy

Welsh

meddalwedd rydd

da

Danish

fri software *or* frit programmel

gratis software

de

German

freie Software

Gratis-Software *or* kostenlose Software

el

Greek

@lowerbox{1pt,
![fs-translations/el-libre](fs-translations/el-libre.png)}\
 *(elefthero logismiko)*

@lowerbox{1pt,
![fs-translations/el-gratis](fs-translations/el-gratis.png)}\
 *(dorean logismiko)*

eo

Esperanto

libera programaro *or* programo

eu

Basque

software librea

doako softwarea

es

Spanish

software libre

software gratuito

et

Estonian

vaba tarkvara

tasuta tarkvara

fa

Persian (Farsi)

@lowerbox{1pt,
![fs-translations/fa-libre](fs-translations/fa-libre.png)}\
 *(narmafzar azad)*

@lowerbox{1pt,
![fs-translations/fa-gratis](fs-translations/fa-gratis.png)}\
 *(narmafzar raygan)*

fi

Finnish

vapaa ohjelmisto

ilmainen ohjelmisto

fr

French

logiciel libre

logiciel gratuit

ga

Irish

saorbhogearraí

bogearraí saora in aisce

he

Hebrew

@lowerbox{1pt,
![fs-translations/he-libre](fs-translations/he-libre.png)}\
 *(tochna chofshit)*

@lowerbox{1pt,
![fs-translations/he-gratis](fs-translations/he-gratis.png)}\
 *(tochna chinamit)*

hi

Hindi

@lowerbox{3pt,
![fs-translations/hi-libre](fs-translations/hi-libre.png)}\
 *(mukt software)*

@lowerbox{3pt,
![fs-translations/hi-gratis](fs-translations/hi-gratis.png)}\
 *(muft software)*

hr

Croatian

slobodan softver

besplatan softver

hu

Hungarian

szabad szoftver

ingyenes szoftver *or* ingyen szoftver

hy

Armenian

@lowerbox{2pt,
![fs-translations/hy-libre](fs-translations/hy-libre.png)}\
 *(azat tsragir/tsragrer)*

ia

Interlingua

libere programmage *or*\
 libere programmario

id

Indonesian

perangkat lunak bebas

io

Ido

libera programaro

is

Icelandic

frjáls hugbúna@dh{}ur

it

Italian

software libero

software gratuito

ja

Japanese

@kern -0.5pt @lowerbox{1.5pt,
![fs-translations/ja-kanji-libre](fs-translations/ja-kanji-libre.png)}\
 *(jiyū-sofutouea)*

@lowerbox{1.5pt,
![fs-translations/ja-kanji-gratis](fs-translations/ja-kanji-gratis.png)}
*(muryō-sofutouea)*

ka

Georgian

@lowerbox{3pt,
![fs-translations/ka-libre](fs-translations/ka-libre.png)} *(tavisupali
programebi)*

@lowerbox{3pt,
![fs-translations/ka-gratis](fs-translations/ka-gratis.png)} *(upaso
programebi)*

ko

Korean

@lowerbox{3pt,
![fs-translations/ko-libre](fs-translations/ko-libre.png)}\
 *(ja-yu software)*

lt

Lithuanian

laisva programinė įranga

nemokama programinė įranga

lv

Latvian

brīva programmatūra

bezmaksas programmatūra

mk

Macedonian

@lowerbox{3pt,
![fs-translations/mk-libre](fs-translations/mk-libre.png)}\
 *(sloboden softver)*

@lowerbox{3pt,
![fs-translations/mk-gratis](fs-translations/mk-gratis.png)} *(besplaten
softver)*

ml

Malayalam

@lowerbox{3pt,
![fs-translations/ml-libre](fs-translations/ml-libre.png)}
*(svatantrasophṯṯveyar)*

@lowerbox{3pt,
![fs-translations/ml-gratis](fs-translations/ml-gratis.png)}
*(soujanyasophṯṯveyar)*

ms

Malay

perisian bebas

nl

Dutch

vrije software

gratis software

no

Norwegian

fri programvare

pl

Polish

wolne oprogramowanie

darmowe oprogramowanie

pt

Portuguese

software livre

ro

Romanian

programe libere

programe gratuite

ru

Russian

@lowerbox{2pt,
![fs-translations/ru-libre](fs-translations/ru-libre.png)}\
 *(svobodnie programmi)*

@lowerbox{2pt,
![fs-translations/ru-gratis](fs-translations/ru-gratis.png)}
*(besplatnie programmi)*

sc

Sardinian

software liberu

si

Sinhala

@lowerbox{3pt,
![fs-translations/si-libre](fs-translations/si-libre.png)}\
 *(nidahas mṛdukāṅga)*

sk

Slovak

slobodný softvér

sl

Slovenian

prosto programje

sq

Albanian

software i lirë

software falas

sr

Serbian

@lowerbox{2pt,
![fs-translations/sr-libre](fs-translations/sr-libre.png)} *or*\
 slobodni softver

@lowerbox{2pt,
![fs-translations/sr-gratis](fs-translations/sr-gratis.png)} *or*
besplatni softver

sv

Swedish

fri programvara *or* fri mjukvara

sw

Swahili

software huru *or*\
 programu huru za kompyuta

ta

Tamil

@lowerbox{3.5pt,
![fs-translations/ta-libre](fs-translations/ta-libre.png)}\
 *(kaṭṭaṟṟa meṉpoñaḷ)*

@lowerbox{3.5pt,
![fs-translations/ta-gratis](fs-translations/ta-gratis.png)} *(illavasa
menporul)*

th

Thai

@lowerbox{2pt,
![fs-translations/th-libre](fs-translations/th-libre.png)}\
 *(sofotwerseri)*

tl

Tagalog (Filipino)

malayang software

tr

Turkish

özgür yazilim

uk

Ukrainian

@kern -1pt @lowerbox{3.1pt,
![fs-translations/uk-libre](fs-translations/uk-libre.png)} *(vil’ne
prohramne zabezpechennja)*

ur

Urdu

@lowerbox{3pt,
![fs-translations/ur-libre](fs-translations/ur-libre.png)}\
 *(azad software)*

@lowerbox{3pt,
![fs-translations/ur-gratis](fs-translations/ur-gratis.png)}\
 *(muft software)*

vi

Vietnamese

@lowerbox{3pt,
![fs-translations/vi-libre](fs-translations/vi-libre.png)}

zh-cn

Chinese (simplified)

@lowerbox{0.9pt,
![fs-translations/zh-cn-libre](fs-translations/zh-cn-libre.png)}\
 *(zi-you ruan-jian)*

@lowerbox{3pt,
![fs-translations/zh-cn-gratis](fs-translations/zh-cn-gratis.png)}\
 *(mian-fei ruan-jian)*

zh-tw

Chinese (traditional)

@lowerbox{0.9pt,
![fs-translations/zh-tw-libre](fs-translations/zh-tw-libre.png)}\
 *(zih-yo)*

@lowerbox{3pt,
![fs-translations/zh-tw-gratis](fs-translations/zh-tw-gratis.png)}\
 *(mien-fei)*

zu

Zulu

isoftware ekhululekile

