---
Generator: 'texi2html 1.82'
description: Untitled Document
distribution: global
keywords: Untitled Document
resource-type: document
title: Untitled Document
...

1. Avoiding Ruinous Compromises {#avoiding-ruinous-compromises .chapter}
===============================

> On September 27, 1983, I announced a plan to create a completely free
> operating system called GNU—for “GNU’s Not Unix.” To mark the 25th
> anniversary of the GNU system, I wrote this article to show how our
> community could avoid ruinous compromises. In addition to avoiding
> such compromises, there are many ways you can help GNU and free
> software. One basic way is to join the Free Software Foundation as an
> Associate Member.[(1)](#FOOT1)

The free software movement aims for a social change: to make all
software free[(2)](#FOOT2) so that all software users are free and can
be part of a community of cooperation. Every nonfree program gives its
developer unjust power over the users. Our goal is to put an end to that
injustice.

The road to freedom is a long road.[(3)](#FOOT3) It will take many steps
and many years to reach a world in which it is normal for software users
to have freedom. Some of these steps are hard, and require sacrifice.
Some of them become easier if we make compromises with people that have
different goals.

Thus, the Free Software Foundation makes compromises—even major ones.
For instance, we made compromises in the patent provisions of version 3
of the GNU General Public License (GNU GPL) so that major companies
would contribute to and distribute GPLv3-covered software and thus bring
some patents under the effect of these provisions.

@firstcopyingnotice{{@footnoterule A similar point in a different area
of life: “‘Nudge’ Is Not Enough, It’s True. But We Already Knew That”
(Jonathan Rowson, 19 July 2011, [http://guardian.co.\
uk/commentisfree/2011/jul/19/nudge-is-not-enough-behaviour-change](http://guardian.co.%3Cbr%3Euk/commentisfree/2011/jul/19/nudge-is-not-enough-behaviour-change))
says that “changes in attitudes and perspectives” are needed as well as
“nudges.” @medskip @footnoterule @smallskip Copyright © 2008, 2009,
2014, 2015 Richard Stallman\
 {This essay was originally published on <http://gnu.org>, in 2008. This
version is part of @fsfsthreecite}

The Lesser GPL’s purpose is a compromise: we use it on certain chosen
free libraries to permit their use in nonfree programs because we think
that legally prohibiting this would only drive developers to proprietary
libraries instead. We accept and install code in GNU programs to make
them work together with common nonfree programs, and we document and
publicize this in ways that encourage users of the latter to install the
former, but not vice versa. We support specific campaigns we agree with,
even when we don’t fully agree with the groups behind them.

But we reject certain compromises even though many others in our
community are willing to make them. For instance, we endorse only the
GNU/Linux distributions that have policies not to include nonfree
software or lead users to install it.[(4)](#FOOT4) To endorse nonfree
distributions would be a ruinous compromise.

Compromises are ruinous if they would work against our aims in the long
term. That can occur either at the level of ideas or at the level of
actions.

At the level of ideas, ruinous compromises are those that reinforce the
premises we seek to change. Our goal is a world in which software users
are free, but as yet most computer users do not even recognize freedom
as an issue. They have taken up “consumer” values, which means they
judge any program only on practical characteristics such as price and
convenience.

Dale Carnegie’s classic self-help book, How to Win Friends and Influence
People, advises that the most effective way to persuade someone to do
something is to present arguments that appeal to his values. There are
ways we can appeal to the consumer values typical in our society. For
instance, free software obtained gratis can save the user money. Many
free programs are convenient and reliable, too. Citing those practical
benefits has succeeded in persuading many users to adopt various free
programs, some of which are now quite successful.

If getting more people to use some free programs is as far as you aim to
go, you might decide to keep quiet about the concept of freedom, and
focus only on the practical advantages that make sense in terms of
consumer values. That’s what the term “open source” and its associated
rhetoric do.

That approach can get us only part way to the goal of freedom. People
who use free software only because it is convenient will stick with it
only as long as it is convenient. And they will see no reason not to use
convenient proprietary programs along with it.

The philosophy of open source presupposes and appeals to consumer
values, and this affirms and reinforces them. That’s why we do not
support open source.

To establish a free community fully and lastingly, we need to do more
than get people to use some free software. We need to spread the idea of
judging software (and other things) on “citizen values,” based on
whether it respects users’ freedom and community, not just in terms of
convenience. Then people will not fall into the trap of a proprietary
program baited by an attractive, convenient feature.

To promote citizen values, we have to talk about them and show how they
are the basis of our actions. We must reject the Dale Carnegie
compromise that would influence their actions by endorsing their
consumer values.

This is not to say we cannot cite practical advantage at all—we can and
we do. It becomes a problem only when the practical advantage steals the
scene and pushes freedom into the background. Therefore, when we cite
the practical advantages of free software, we reiterate frequently that
those are just *additional, secondary* reasons to prefer it.

It’s not enough to make our words accord with our ideals; our actions
have to accord with them too. So we must also avoid compromises that
involve doing or legitimizing the things we aim to stamp out.

For instance, experience shows that you can attract some users to
GNU/Linux if you include some nonfree programs. This could mean a cute
nonfree application that will catch some user’s eye, or a nonfree
programming platform such as Java[(5)](#FOOT5) (formerly) or the Flash
runtime (still), or a nonfree device driver that enables support for
certain hardware models.

These compromises are tempting, but they undermine the goal. If you
distribute nonfree software, or steer people towards it, you will find
it hard to say, “Nonfree software is an injustice, a social problem, and
we must put an end to it.” And even if you do continue to say those
words, your actions will undermine them.

The issue here is not whether people should be *able* or *allowed* to
install nonfree software; a general-purpose system enables and allows
users to do whatever they wish. The issue is whether we guide users
towards nonfree software. What they do on their own is their
responsibility; what we do for them, and what we direct them towards, is
ours. We must not direct the users towards proprietary software as if it
were a solution, because proprietary software is the problem.

A ruinous compromise is not just a bad influence on others. It can
distort your own values, too, through cognitive dissonance. If you have
certain values, but your actions imply other, conflicting values, you
are likely to change your values or your actions so as to resolve the
contradiction. Thus, projects that argue only from practical advantages,
or direct people toward some nonfree software, nearly always shy away
from even *suggesting* that nonfree software is unethical. For their
participants, as well as for the public, they reinforce consumer values.
We must reject these compromises if we wish to keep our values straight.

If you want to move to free software without compromising the goal of
freedom, look at the FSF’s resources area, at
<http://www.fsf.org/resources>. It lists hardware and machine
configurations that work with free software, totally free GNU/Linux
distros to install, and thousands of free software packages[(6)](#FOOT6)
that work in a 100 percent free software environment. If you want to
help the community stay on the road to freedom, one important way is to
publicly uphold citizen values. When people are discussing what is good
or bad, or what to do, cite the values of freedom and community and
argue from them.

A road that lets you go faster is not better if it leads to the wrong
place. Compromise is essential to achieve an ambitious goal, but beware
of compromises that lead away from the goal.

<div class="footnote">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

### [(1)](#DOCF1)

@raggedright You can support the FSF through a membership at
<http://my.fsf.org/join>. @end raggedright

### [(2)](#DOCF2)

@raggedright “Free” as in “freedom.” See @pageref{Definition} for the
full definition of free software. @end raggedright

### [(3)](#DOCF3)

@raggedright See FSF executive director John Sullivan’s 2008 article
“The Last Mile Is Always the Hardest,” at
[http://fsf.org/bulletin/2008/spring/the-last-mile-is-\
always-the-hardest](http://fsf.org/bulletin/2008/spring/the-last-mile-is-%3Cbr%3Ealways-the-hardest),
for his perspective on this issue. @end raggedright

### [(4)](#DOCF4)

@raggedright You can find the full list of the Free System Distribution
Guidelines (GNU FSDG) at
[http://gnu.org/philosophy/free-system-distribution-\
guidelines.html](http://gnu.org/philosophy/free-system-distribution-%3Cbr%3Eguidelines.html).
@end raggedright

### [(5)](#DOCF5)

@raggedright See <http://gnu.org/philosophy/java-trap.html> for more on
this. @end raggedright

### [(6)](#DOCF6)

@raggedright The Free Software Directory, at <http://directory.fsf.org>,
lists all the free software we know about. @end raggedright

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

This document was generated by *tonghuix* on *March 25, 2016* using
[*texi2html 1.82*](http://www.nongnu.org/texi2html/).\
