1. Measures Governments Can Use to Promote Free Software {#measures-governments-can-use-to-promote-free-software .chapter}
========================================================

## 政府推动自由软件的措施

@firstcopyingnotice{{@footnoterule @smallskip Copyright © 2011–2014 Free
Software Foundation, Inc.\
 {This article was first published on <http://gnu.org>, in 2011. This
version is part of @fsfsthreecite}

> Copyright © 2011–2014 自由软件基金会，此文首发于2011年 <http://gnu.org>。

This article suggests policies for a strong and firm effort to promote
free software within the state, and to lead the rest of the country
towards software freedom.

本文提出了一些强力政策推动自由软件在国内的发展，并让国内其他地方都转向软件自由。

The mission of the state is to organize society for the freedom and
well-being of the people. One aspect of this mission, in the computing
field, is to encourage users to adopt free software: software that
respects the users’ freedom.[(1)](#FOOT1) A proprietary (nonfree)
program tramples the freedom of those that use it; it is a social
problem that the state should work to eradicate.

国家的使命是通过整合社会资源为人民自由谋福祉。这个福利的一个方面在计算机领域就是鼓励用户使用自由软件：代表用户自由的软件[^1]。而专有（非自由）软件则践踏了人民的自由，这是一个社会问题，所以政府应该去解决这个问题。

@firstcopyingnotice{{@footnoterule @smallskip Copyright © 2011–2014 Free
Software Foundation, Inc.\
 {This article was first published on <http://gnu.org>, in 2011. This
version is part of @fsfsthreecite}

The state needs to insist on free software in its own computing for the
sake of its computational sovereignty (the state’s control over its own
computing). All users deserve control over their computing, but the
state has a responsibility to the people to maintain control over the
computing it does on their behalf. Most government activities now depend
on computing, and its control over those activities depends on its
control over that computing. Losing this control in an agency whose
mission is critical undermines national security.

从国家计算机主权角度来说，国家需要坚持自由软件的主张（国家控制计算机）。所有用户理所应当控制自己的计算过程，但国家对人民有代表人民对计算过程维持控制的责任。现在大多数政府活动都依赖计算过程，而对这些活动的控制则依赖于对计算过程的控制。而在任务很关键的机构里失去这种控制将会极大危害国家安全。

Moving state agencies to free software can also provide secondary
benefits, such as saving money and encouraging local software-support
businesses.

将国家机构转向自由软件同时也会提供额外的好处，比如节省经费和鼓励本地的软件支持行业等等。

In this text, “state entities” refers to all levels of government, and
means public agencies including schools, public-private partnerships,
largely state-funded activities such as charter schools, and “private”
corporations controlled by the state or established with special
privileges or functions by the state.

本文中，“国家实体”指代各级政府，以及公共机构包括学校，公共-私立伙伴关系，大型国有活动比如特许公立学校，以及由国家控制或由国家特许经营或注资的“私营”企业。

### Education {#education .subheading}

### 教育领域

The most important policy concerns education, since that shapes the
future of the country:

教育领域的政策非常重要，因为会影响国家的未来

-   **Teach only free software**\
     Educational activities, or at least those of state entities, must
    teach only free software (thus, they should never lead students to
    use a nonfree program), and should teach the civic reasons for
    insisting on free software. To teach a nonfree program is to teach
    dependence, which is contrary to the mission of the school.

- **只能教授自由软件**

  教育活动或者至少这些国立教育实体，必须只教授自由软件（因此，他们决不能引导学生使用非自由程序），并教育学生坚持使用自由软件背后的公民原因。教授非自由程序就是在教授依赖性，这与学校的使命是相悖的。

### The State and the Public {#the-state-and-the-public .subheading}

### 国家与公众

Also crucial are state policies that influence what software individuals
and organizations use:

这些政策对个人与组织使用软件有巨大影响：

-   **Never require nonfree programs**\
     Laws and public sector practices must be changed so that they never
    require or pressure individuals or organizations to use a
    nonfree program. They should also discourage communication and
    publication practices that imply such consequences (including
    Digital Restrictions Management[(2)](#FOOT2)).

- **永远不要求非自由程序**

  法律和公共部门实践活动必须改革永远不能要求或施压给个人或组织使用非自由程序。他们还必须不能在通信或出版行业引入类似的规定（包括数字限制管理 Digital Restrictions Management[^2]）。

-   **Distribute only free software**\
     Whenever a state entity distributes software to the public,
    including programs included in or specified by its web pages, it
    must be distributed as free software, and must be capable of running
    on a platform containing exclusively free software.

- **只散播自由软件**

  国家实体无论在什么时候将软件公开散播，包括网页中包含或附带的程序，必须作为自由软件散播，且必须与只运行自由软件的平台兼容。

-   **State web sites**\
     State entity web sites and network services must be designed so
    that users can use them, without disadvantage, by means of free
    software exclusively.

- **政府网站**

  政府实体的网站和网络服务必须设计成用户能够只用自由软件使用，（相对专有软件——译者注）没有劣势。

-   **Free formats and protocols**\
     State entities must use only file formats and communication
    protocols that are well supported by free software, preferably with
    published specifications. (We do not state this in terms of
    “standards” because it should apply to nonstandardized interfaces as
    well as standardized ones.) For example, they must not distribute
    audio or video recordings in formats that require Flash or nonfree
    codecs, and public libraries must not distribute works with Digital
    Restrictions Management.

- **自由的格式和协议**

  国家实体必须只使用自由软件广泛支持的文件格式和通信协议，特别是已经公开的规格（我们并不说“标准”，因为它应该适用于标准和非标准的接口）。例如，他们必须不能散播使用 Flash 或者非自由解码器播放的音频或视频文件，对外公布的库必须不能包含数字限制管理。

-   **Untie computers from licenses**\
     Sale of computers must not require purchase of a proprietary
    software license. The seller should be required by law to offer the
    purchaser the option of buying the computer without the proprietary
    software and without paying the license fee. The imposed payment is
    a secondary wrong, and should not distract us from the essential
    injustice of proprietary software, the loss of freedom which results
    from using it. Nonetheless, the abuse of forcing users to pay for it
    gives certain proprietary software developers an additional unfair
    advantage, detrimental to users’ freedom. It is proper for the state
    to prevent this abuse.

- **解除对计算机的限制性许可证**

  销售计算机必须不能要求购买一份专有软件许可证。必须通过法律来约束销售方提供给消费者购买计算机时不需要专有软件以及不需要为此付费的选项。强制付费是另一个错误，不能让我们从专有软件的不公中分散注意力，应更关注失去自由而导致的损失。虽然如此，强迫用户为其付费等于是给了特定专有软件开发者一个额外的不平等优势——让他们来决定用户的自由。国家应该防止这种情况发生。

### Computational Sovereignty {#computational-sovereignty .subheading}

### 国家计算主权

Several policies affect the computational sovereignty of the state.
State entities must maintain control over their computing, not cede
control to private hands. These points apply to all computers, including
smartphones.

很多政策会影响到国家计算主权。国家实体必须维持对它们的计算资源的控制，而不是放弃控制而委之于私人之手。这一点适用于所有计算机，包括智能手机。

-   **Migrate to free software**\
     State entities must migrate to free software, and must not install,
    or continue using, any nonfree software except under a
    temporary exception. Only one agency should have the authority to
    grant these temporary exceptions, and only when shown
    compelling reasons. This agency’s goal should be to reduce the
    number of exceptions to zero.

- **迁移到自由软件**

  国家实体必须迁移到自由软件，并且不能安装和继续使用非自由软件，除非临时例外。只有一个机构可以有权授予这些临时例外，且需要令人信服的理由。这个机构的目标必须是将这些例外减少到零。

-   **Develop free IT solutions**\
     When a state entity pays for development of a computing solution,
    the contract must require it be delivered as free software, and that
    it be designed such that one can both run it and develop it on a
    100-percent-free environment. All contracts must require this, so
    that if the developer does not comply with these requirements, the
    work cannot be paid for.

- **开发自由的 IT 解决方案**

  当政府实体需要为开发计算机解决方案付费时，合同必须要求以自由软件形式交付，并且方案必须设计为可以在百分之百自由软件环境中运行和开发。所有合同都需要这条，这样如果开发商一旦不符合需求，作品就不给报酬。

-   **Choose computers for free software**\
     When a state entity buys or leases computers, it must choose among
    the models that come closest, in their class, to being capable of
    running without any proprietary software. The state should maintain,
    for each class of computers, a list of the models authorized based
    on this criterion. Models available to both the public and the state
    should be preferred to models available only to the state.

- **为自由软件选配计算机**

  当政府实体购买或租借计算机时，必须在其等级中选择几乎无需专有软件即可运行的型号。政府需要为每个等级的计算机维护一个按此标准认证过的型号的列表。对于公开型号和政府型号，应该选择只对政府开放的型号。

-   **Negotiate with manufacturers**\
     The state should negotiate actively with manufacturers to bring
    about the availability in the market (to the state and the public)
    of suitable hardware products, in all pertinent product areas, that
    require no proprietary software.

- **与厂商协商**

  国家必须经常与厂商协商市场（对外销售或和政府）上适合的硬件产品，在所有相关产品领域，都不能需要专有软件。

-   **Unite with other states**\
     The state should invite other states to negotiate collectively with
     manufacturers about suitable hardware products. Together they will
     have more clout.

- **与其他国家联合**

  本国需邀请其他国家来和厂商一同协商适合的硬件产品。联合它们获得更多影响力。

### Computational Sovereignty II {#computational-sovereignty-ii .subheading}

### 国家计算主权之二

The computational sovereignty (and security) of the state includes
control over the computers that do the state’s work. This requires
avoiding Service as a Software Substitute,[(3)](#FOOT3) unless the
service is run by a state agency under the same branch of government, as
well as other practices that diminish the state control over its
computing. Therefore,

国家计算主权（和安全）包括控制计算机做国家的事情。这需要避免“替代软件的服务”（Service as a Software Substitute）[^3]——除非这类服务是运行在国家机关的同一分支机构，以及其他降低国家对计算资源控制的实用形式。因此：

-   **State must control its computers**\
     Every computer that the state uses must belong to or be leased by
    the same branch of government that uses it, and that branch must not
    cede to outsiders the right to decide who has physical access to the
    computer, who can do maintenance (hardware or software) on it, or
    what software should be installed in it. If the computer is not
    portable, then while in use it must be in a physical space of which
    the state is the occupant (either as owner or as tenant).

- **国家必须控制其计算机**

  每一台国家使用的计算机必须从属于或租借自政府的同一个分支机构，而这个政府分支机构必须不能把谁有权物理访问计算机，谁能维护（软件和硬件），或者能够安装什么软件的权力放弃给外人。如果计算机不可移动，那么计算机所在的物理空间必须是国家所有（无论是所有者或者承租人）。

### Influence Development {#influence-development .subheading}

### 对开发的影响

State policy affects free and nonfree software development:

国家政策会影响自由和非自由软件的开发：

-   **Encourage free**\
     The state should encourage developers to create or enhance free
    software and make it available to the public, e.g. by tax breaks and
    other financial incentive. Contrariwise, no such incentives should
    be granted for development, distribution or use of nonfree software.

- **鼓励自由**

  国家需要鼓励开发者创立或完善自由软件并将其公开，比如通过减税或其他财政补贴的方式。相反，对非自由软件的开发者则没有此类财政补贴。

-   **Don’t encourage nonfree**\
     In particular, proprietary software developers should not be able
    to “donate” copies to schools and claim a tax write-off for the
    nominal value of the software. Proprietary software is not
    legitimate in a school.

- **不要鼓励非自由**

  特别的，专有软件开发者不应该“捐献”软件副本给学校并减少税务的义务。专有软件在学校是不合法的。

### E-Waste {#e-waste .subheading}

### 电子垃圾

Freedom should not imply e-waste:

自由并不意味着产生更多电子垃圾：

-   **Replaceable software**\
     Many modern computers are designed to make it impossible to replace
    their preloaded software with free software. Thus, the only way to
    free them is to junk them. This practice is harmful to society.

    Therefore, it should be illegal, or at least substantially
    discouraged through heavy taxation, to sell, import or distribute in
    quantity a new computer (that is, not second-hand) or computer-based
    product for which secrecy about hardware interfaces or intentional
    restrictions prevent users from developing, installing and using
    replacements for any and all of the installed software that the
    manufacturer could upgrade. This would apply, in particular, to any
    device on which “jailbreaking” is needed to install a different
    operating system, or in which the interfaces for some peripherals
    are secret.

- **可替代性软件**

  很多现在计算机设计为无法用自由软件替代其预装的软件。因此唯一解放它们的方式就是丢掉，而这对社会不利。

  因此，大量销售、进口或分发硬件接口保密或有意设限，因而阻碍用户开发、安装或使用任何其内可由制造方升级的预装软件的替代品的新（即，非二手）计算机或基于计算机的产品应该是非法的，或者至少课以重税来劝退。这特别适用于任何需要“越狱”方可在其上安装不同操作系统的设备，或包含接口保密的外设的设备。

### Technological Neutrality {#technological-neutrality .subheading}

### 技术中立

With the measures in this article, the state can recover control over
its computing, and lead the country’s citizens, businesses and
organizations towards control over their computing. However, some object
on the grounds that this would violate the “principle” of technological
neutrality.

通过本文中中给出的措施，政府可以恢复对计算机的控制，并引导国家公民、商业和组织控制自己的计算机。然而，很多反对意见认为这会违反技术中立的“原则”。

The idea of technological neutrality is that the state should not impose
arbitrary preferences on technical choices. Whether that is a valid
principle is disputable, but it is limited in any case to issues that
are merely technical. The measures advocated here address issues of
ethical, social and political importance, so they are outside the scope
of *technological* neutrality.[(4)](#FOOT4) Only those who wish to
subjugate a country would suggest that its government be “neutral” about
its sovereignty or its citizens’ freedom.

技术中立是指国家不应该在技术选型时强加干涉。无论这是不是有效的原则或是争议，这仅仅只涉及到技术问题。而这里提出来的措施解决的是道义、社会和政治问题，因此超出了*技术*中立的范畴[^4]。除非他们觉得其政府需要在主权和公民自由上保持“中立”。

### [(1)](#DOCF1)

@raggedright See @pageref{Definition} for the full definition of free
software. @end raggedright

[^1]: 参见《自由软件定义》一文了解自由软件的定义

### [(2)](#DOCF2)

@raggedright See both our anti-DRM campaigns page, at
[http://defectivebydesign.org/\
what\_is\_drm](http://defectivebydesign.org/%3Cbr%3Ewhat_is_drm), and
@pageref{DRM} for more on this issue. @end raggedright

[^2]: 参见反 DRM 活动网站[http://defectivebydesign.org/what\_is\_drm](http://defectivebydesign.org/%3Cbr%3Ewhat_is_drm)以及《DRM》一文了解相关问题。

### [(3)](#DOCF3)

@raggedright See “Who Does That Server Really Serve?” (@pageref{Server})
for more on SaaSS. @end raggedright

[^3]: 参见《服务器》一文的“服务器真正为谁服务？”相关章节，了解 SaaSS。

### [(4)](#DOCF4)

@raggedright See my article “Technological Neutrality and Free
Software,” at [http://www.\
gnu.org/philosophy/technological-neutrality.html](http://www.%3Cbr%3Egnu.org/philosophy/technological-neutrality.html),
for more on this issue. @end raggedright

[^4]: 参见我的文章“Technological Neutrality and Free Software” [http://www.gnu.org/philosophy/technological-neutrality.html](http://www.%3Cbr%3Egnu.org/philosophy/technological-neutrality.html)
