---
Generator: 'texi2html 1.82'
description: Untitled Document
distribution: global
keywords: Untitled Document
resource-type: document
title: Untitled Document
...

1. Giving the Software Field Protection from Patents {#giving-the-software-field-protection-frompatents .chapter}
====================================================

@firstcopyingnotice{{ See also my article “Patent Reform Is Not Enough,”
at <http://gnu.org/philosophy/patent-reform-is-not-enough.html>.
@medskip @footnoterule @smallskip Copyright © 2012, 2013 Free Software
Foundation\
 A version of this article was first published on the Wired web site, as
“Let’s Limit the Effect of Software Patents, Since We Can’t Eliminate
Them” (Wired, 1 November 2012,
<http://wired.com/opinion/2012/11/richard-stallman-software-patents/>).\
 It was published on <http://gnu.org> in 2012. This version is part of
@fsfsthreecite}

Patents threaten every software developer, and the patent wars we have
long feared have broken out. Software developers and software
users—which, in our society, is most people—need software to be free of
patents.

The patents that threaten us are often called “software patents,” but
that term is misleading. Such patents are not about any specific
program. Rather, each patent describes some practical idea, and says
that anyone carrying out the idea can be sued. So it is clearer to call
them “computational idea patents.”

The US patent system doesn’t label patents to say this one’s a “software
patent” and that one isn’t. Software developers are the ones who make a
distinction between the patents that threaten us—those that cover ideas
that can be implemented in software—and the rest. For example, if the
patented idea is the shape of a physical structure or a chemical
reaction, no program can implement that idea; that patent doesn’t
threaten the software field. But if the idea that’s patented is a
computation, that patent’s barrel points at software developers and
users.

This is not to say that computational idea patents prohibit only
software. These ideas can also be implemented in hardware—and many of
them have been. Each patent typically covers both hardware *and*
software implementations of the idea.

### The Special Problem of Software {#the-special-problem-of-software .subheading}

Still, software is where computational idea patents cause a special
problem. In software, it’s easy to implement thousands of ideas together
in one program. If 10 percent are patented, that means hundreds of
patents threaten it.

When Dan Ravicher of the Public Patent Foundation studied one large
program (Linux, which is the kernel of the GNU/Linux operating system)
in 2004, he found 283 US patents that appeared to cover computing ideas
implemented in the source code of that program. That same year, a
magazine estimated that Linux was .25 percent of the whole GNU/Linux
system. Multiplying 300 by 400 we get the order-of-magnitude estimate
that the system as a whole was *threatened by around 100,000 patents.*

If half of those patents were eliminated as “bad quality”—mistakes of
the patent system, that is—it would not really change things. Whether
100,000 patents or 50,000, it’s the same disaster. This is why it’s a
mistake to limit our criticism of software patents to just “patent
trolls” or “bad quality” patents. The worst patent aggressor today is
Apple, which isn’t a “troll” by the usual definition; I don’t know
whether Apple’s patents are “good quality,” but the better the patent’s
“quality” the more dangerous its threat.

We need to fix the whole problem, not just part of it.

The usual suggestions for correcting this problem legislatively involve
changing the criteria for granting patents—for instance, to ban issuance
of patents on computational practices and systems to perform them. This
approach has two drawbacks.

First, patent lawyers are clever at reformulating patents to fit
whatever rules may apply; they transform any attempt at limiting the
substance of patents into a requirement of mere form. For instance, many
US computational idea patents describe a system including an arithmetic
unit, an instruction sequencer, a memory, plus controls to carry out a
particular computation. This is a peculiar way of describing a computer
running a program that does a certain computation; it was designed to
make the patent application satisfy criteria that the US patent system
was believed for a time to require.

Second, the US already has many thousands of computational idea patents,
and changing the criteria to prevent issuing more would not get rid of
the existing ones. We would have to wait almost 20 years for the problem
to be entirely corrected through the expiration of these patents. We
could envision legislating the abolition of these existing patents, but
that is probably unconstitutional. (The Supreme Court has perversely
insisted that Congress can extend private privileges at the expense of
the public’s rights but that it can’t go in the other direction.)

### A Different Approach: Limit Effect, Not Patentability {#a-different-approach-limit-effect-not-patentability .subheading}

My suggestion is to change the *effect* of patents. We should legislate
that developing, distributing, or running a program on generally used
computing hardware does not constitute patent infringement. This
approach has several advantages:

-   It does not require classifying patents or patent applications as
    “software” or “not software.”
-   It provides developers and users with protection from both existing
    and potential future computational idea patents.
-   Patent lawyers cannot defeat the intended effect by writing
    applications differently.

This approach doesn’t entirely invalidate existing computational idea
patents, because they would continue to apply to implementations using
special-purpose hardware. This is an advantage because it eliminates an
argument against the legal validity of the plan. The US passed a law
some years ago shielding surgeons from patent lawsuits, so that even if
surgical procedures are patented, surgeons are safe. That provides a
precedent for this solution.

Software developers and software users need protection from patents.
This is the only legislative solution that would provide full protection
for all. We could then go back to competing or cooperating…without the
fear that some stranger will wipe away our work.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

This document was generated by *tonghuix* on *March 25, 2016* using
[*texi2html 1.82*](http://www.nongnu.org/texi2html/).\
