1. What’s in a Name? {#whats-in-a-name .chapter}
====================

名字的含义？

@firstcopyingnotice{{To learn more about this issue, you can read our
GNU/Linux FAQ, at <http://gnu.org/gnu/gnu-linux-faq.html>, the essay
“Linux and the GNU System” (@pageref{Linux and GNU}), which gives a
history of the GNU/Linux system as it relates to this issue of naming,
and the article “GNU Users Who Have Never Heard of GNU,” at
<http://gnu.org/gnu/gnu-users-never-heard-of-gnu.html>.\
 @footnoterule @smallskip Copyright © 2000, 2006, 2007 Richard Stallman\
 {This essay was originally published on <http://gnu.org>, in 2000. This
version is part of @fsfsthreecite} Names convey meanings; our choice of
names determines the meaning of what we say. An inappropriate name gives
people the wrong idea. A rose by any other name would smell as sweet—but
if you call it a pen, people will be rather disappointed when they try
to write with it. And if you call pens “roses,” people may not realize
what they are good for. If you call our operating system Linux, that
conveys a mistaken idea of the system’s origin, history, and purpose. If
you call it GNU/Linux, that conveys (though not in detail) an accurate
idea.

> 关于此主题了解更多，你也可以阅读我们的 GNU/Linux FAQ <http://gnu.org/gnu/gnu-linux-faq.html>，我们关于Linux 与 GNU 项目 和 从来没听过GNU的GNU用户的页面。Copyright © 2000, 2006, 2007 Richard Stallman
> 原中译 monnand，此处略有修改

顾名则思义；我们所选的名字代表了我们所要传达的思想。一个不恰当的名字会向人们传递错误的思想。玫瑰不管叫什么闻起来总是甜的——但是如果你把它叫作笔，当人们用它写字时将会很失望。同样地，如果你把笔叫作“玫瑰”，人们可能就不知道它们能做什么了。如果你把我们的操作系统称为“Linux”，则会传达一些关于系统起源、历史和目的的错误概念。如果你称之为GNU/Linux，这将传达（虽然不详细）一个准确的概念。

Does this really matter for our community? Is it important whether
people know the system’s origin, history, and purpose? Yes—because
people who forget history are often condemned to repeat it. The Free
World that has developed around GNU/Linux is not guaranteed to survive;
the problems that led us to develop GNU are not completely eradicated,
and they threaten to come back.

这对我们的社区重要吗？人们是否了解系统的起源、历史和目的重要吗？是的——因为忘记历史的人往往要注定要重蹈覆辙。围绕 GNU/Linux 而开发出来的自由世界是不安全的；迫使我们开发 GNU 的问题并没有被彻底根除，而且他们总是想复辟

When I explain why it’s appropriate to call the operating system
GNU/Linux rather than Linux, people sometimes respond this way:

当我解释为什么把这个操作系统称为“GNU/Linux”比“Linux”要好时，人们有时这样回应：

> Granted that the GNU Project deserves credit for this work, is it
> really worth a fuss when people don’t give credit? Isn’t the important
> thing that the job was done, not who did it? You ought to relax, take
> pride in the job well done, and not worry about the credit.

> 就算 GNU 工程因其工作而应该得到赞誉，但如果人们不给予它这种赞誉，就真的值得如此大惊小怪的吗？不管是谁做的，反正工作被完成了，这不是重要的事吗？你应该心态平和，以干好工作为荣，而不是对荣誉的问题耿耿于怀。 

This would be wise advice, if only the situation were like that—if the
job were done and it were time to relax. If only that were true! But
challenges abound, and this is no time to take the future for granted.
Our community’s strength rests on commitment to freedom and cooperation.
Using the name GNU/Linux is a way for people to remind themselves and
inform others of these goals.

这似乎是个明智的建议，如果所有的情况都像那样，大家干完工作后都不计得失，那这建议还真是对的！但现实充满挑战，现在还不是那样对未来想当然的时候。我们社区的力量靠的是自由与合作的保证。使用GNU/Linux这个名字是一种让人们用来提醒自己和他人了解这些目标的方式。

It is possible to write good free software without thinking of GNU; much
good work has been done in the name of Linux also. But the term “Linux”
has been associated ever since it was first coined with a philosophy
that does not make a commitment to the freedom to cooperate. As the name
is increasingly used by business, we will have even more trouble making
it connect with community spirit.

A great challenge to the future of free software comes from the tendency
of the “Linux” distribution companies to add nonfree software to
GNU/Linux in the name of convenience and power. All the major commercial
distribution developers do this; none limits itself to free software.
Most of them do not clearly identify the nonfree packages in their
distributions. Many even develop nonfree software and add it to the
system. Some outrageously advertise “Linux” systems that are “licensed
per seat,” which give the user as much freedom as Microsoft Windows.

People try to justify adding nonfree software in the name of the
“popularity of Linux”—in effect, valuing popularity above freedom.
Sometimes this is openly admitted. For instance, Wired magazine said
that Robert McMillan, editor of Linux Magazine, “feels that the move
toward open source software should be fueled by technical, rather than
political, decisions.”And Caldera’s CEO openly urged users to drop the
goal of freedom and work instead for the “popularity of
Linux.”[(1)](#FOOT1)

Adding nonfree software to the GNU/Linux system may increase the
popularity, if by popularity we mean the number of people using some of
GNU/Linux in combination with nonfree software. But at the same time, it
implicitly encourages the community to accept nonfree software as a good
thing, and forget the goal of freedom. It is not good to drive faster if
you can’t stay on the road.

When the nonfree “add-on” is a library or programming tool, it can
become a trap for free software developers. When they write free
software that depends on the nonfree package, their software cannot be
part of a completely free system. Motif and Qt trapped large amounts of
free software in this way in the past, creating problems whose solutions
took years. Motif remained somewhat of a problem until it became
obsolete and was no longer used. Later, Sun’s nonfree

Java implementation had a similar effect: the Java Trap,[(2)](#FOOT2)
fortunately now mostly corrected. If our community keeps moving in this
direction, it could redirect the future of GNU/Linux into a mosaic of
free and nonfree components. Five years from now, we will surely still
have plenty of free software; but if we are not careful, it will hardly
be usable without the nonfree software that users expect to find with
it. If this happens, our campaign for freedom will have failed.

If releasing free alternatives were simply a matter of programming,
solving future problems might become easier as our community’s
development resources increase. But we face obstacles that threaten to
make this harder: laws that prohibit free software. As software patents
mount up, and as laws like the Digital Millennium Copyright Act are used
to prohibit the development of free software for important jobs such as
viewing a DVD or listening to a RealAudio stream, we will find ourselves
with no clear way to fight the patented and secret data formats except
to *reject the nonfree programs that use them.*

Meeting these challenges will require many different kinds of effort.
But what we need above all, to confront any kind of challenge, is to
remember the goal of freedom to cooperate. We can’t expect a mere desire
for powerful, reliable software to motivate people to make great
efforts. We need the kind of determination that people have when they
fight for their freedom and their community—determination to keep on for
years and not give up.

In our community, this goal and this determination emanate mainly from
the GNU Project. We’re the ones who talk about freedom and community as
something to stand firm for; the organizations that speak of “Linux”
normally don’t say this. The magazines about “Linux” are typically full
of ads for nonfree software; the companies that package “Linux” add
nonfree software to the system; other companies “support Linux” by
developing nonfree applications to run on GNU/Linux; the user groups for
“Linux” typically invite salesmen to present those applications. The
main place people in our community are likely to come across the idea of
freedom and determination is in the GNU Project.

But when people come across it, will they feel it relates to them?

People who know they are using a system that came out of the GNU Project
can see a direct relationship between themselves and GNU. They won’t
automatically agree with our philosophy, but at least they will see a
reason to think seriously about it. In contrast, people who consider
themselves “Linux users,” and believe that the GNU Project “developed
tools which proved to be useful in Linux,” typically perceive only an
indirect relationship between GNU and themselves. They may just ignore
the GNU philosophy when they come across it.

The GNU Project is idealistic, and anyone encouraging idealism today
faces a great obstacle: the prevailing ideology encourages people to
dismiss idealism as “impractical.” Our idealism has been extremely
practical: it is the reason we have a free GNU/Linux operating system.
People who love this system ought to know that it is our idealism made
real.

If “the job” really were done, if there were nothing at stake except
credit, perhaps it would be wiser to let the matter drop. But we are not
in that position. To inspire people to do the work that needs to be
done, we need to be recognized for what we have already done. Please
help us, by calling the operating system GNU/Linux.

<div class="footnote">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

### [(1)](#DOCF1)

@raggedright Dietmar Muller, “Stallman: Love Is Not Free,” 10 July 2001,
<http://zdnet.com/article/stallman-love-is-not-free/>. @end raggedright

### [(2)](#DOCF2)

@raggedright See “Free but Shackled—The Java Trap,” at
<http://gnu.org/philosophy/java-trap.html>, for more on this issue. @end
raggedright

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

This document was generated by *tonghuix* on *March 25, 2016* using
[*texi2html 1.82*](http://www.nongnu.org/texi2html/).\
